Omai Digitization Project Contextualization
      The Omai Digitization Project consists of two digital projects, a virtual reality recreation of three miniatures designed by Phillipe De Loutherbourg for Omai, Or, A Trip Round the World in 1786, which Dr. David Taylor at Oxford University has overseen. and a digital edition of the 1786 script for Omai, encoded to Textual Encoding Initiative (TEI) standards.At this stage in the project, I have used the TEI to encode from the front matter through the end of part one of the script. As this is my first time working on encoding a text using TEI, a large portion of the preparatory work necessary to begin encoding was familiarizing myself with the coding standards used for dramas and poetry—as many of the lines are performed in verse. I focused on encoding the text as close as possible to the source document with minor adaptations for clarity: such as updated and unified spelling, switching the long ‘s’ characters with standard ‘s,’ numerical dates instead of Roman numeral dates, and marking author notes numerically instead of with symbols. Going forward with the TEI portion of the project, I will continue to encode part two and the procession, improve readability in the front matter—particularly the character and cast list, and add editorial notes.
	Accompanying these digital resources will be a section about the project and informational pages that explain the scope of the digital work—the about section will need to be updated as future work changes the outcome of the digital projects—the implementation and importance of the projects to contemporary scholarship on Omai. The contextual information on this page will provide readers with foundational information about the significance of the pantomime in the eighteenth century, Phillipe De Loutherbourg, Captain Cook’s voyages, and Mai. I have curated the summaries of these topics to provide a foundational understanding of the history behind the performance, creator, and pop culture in the late eighteenth century to enrich the virtual learning experience and provide references for further research on Omai. The content for those pages begins below. 
About the Omai Digitization Project
      The Omai Digitization Project is working to reanimate the surviving 1786 miniature set models designed by Phillipe De Loutherbourg for the pantomime Omai, Or, A Trip Round the World, through virtual reality technology and to create an encoded version of the script by John O’Keefe using the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) standards. A virtual reality experience of De Loutherbourg’s Omai set brings the visual aspect of the performance back as a vital component of the pantomime for contemporary audiences, as the visual elements were crucial for eighteenth-century viewers’ enjoyment of the play. 
      De Loutherbourg’s designs and technology altered the way audiences experienced performance in the late eighteenth century. Similarly, the Omai Digitization Project strives to utilize new technology to recreate awe for modern users. The virtual reality app brings the intricate and historically accurate models to viewers’ fingertips to explore as they read the script. The app features life-size replications of the miniatures that allow users to navigate through the various parts of the sets. The three animated scenes illustrate the dimensional effects De Loutherbourg achieved by staggering the size and shape of the set that can be explored on the app. 
The Pantomime 
      The pantomimes in eighteenth-century Britain were wildly popular forms of theatrical entertainment because of ‘new’ technology, dance, and visual aspects that accompanied simplistic storylines, wowing audiences with the combination of artistry displayed in the performance. Surviving scripts, reviews, and engravings of pantomimes from the eighteenth century emphasize the importance of visual cues and movement in the performances. Author of Harlequin Britain, John O’Brien, notes that “pantomime entertainments became famous for surprising their audiences, but their newness derived much more from scenery, special effects, and performance than from their plots, which were typically quite familiar” to the audience (5). Pantomimes reused characters and stories from previous performances or popular culture, like Harlequin, who was one of the most famous characters used in British theatre in the eighteenth century. Harlequin’s costume, mannerisms, and attitude transcended a specific play to create a foundational character that eighteenth-century audiences could easily recognize. ‘Harlequin’ characters were used in various London performances from the mainpeice and entr'acte to the afterpiece. 
      In the late eighteenth century, the theater's growing popularity allowed dance to flourish as part of the overall theatrical experience. From the entr’acte to the pantomimes, more dancers and dances were being employed and documented in the playbills as the number of theaters in England also increased (Goff 219). While scholars know that the visual dance aspect of pantomimes was important, the poor medium of documentation for visual performances could not adequately preserve the choreography for future study. O’Brien said that just “A few minutes of film of any eighteenth-century pantomime would probably tell us more than all the printed records we now have to work with” (5). Choreographic records are limited to the acknowledgment that there was a dance performed during the pantomimes since there is no sufficient written language that transposed the performance to paper, despite attempts by John Weaver to craft a character-based written description to preserve and share the performances he choreographed. 
      Although the choreography has been lost to time, paintings of the costumes and sets from various surviving performance materials inform modern researchers about the mass cultural admiration for these spectacular dance routines. Extravagant costume and set designs used in pantomimes transported eighteenth-century audiences, contributing to the performances' visual appeal and the theater's growing popularity.
Phillipe De Loutherbourg
      Phillipe Jacques De Loutherbourg (1740-1812) began studying art at fifteen years old in Paris under Carle van Loo and Francois Joseph Casanova. In 1763, he began showing his artwork, primarily landscapes, at the Salon before traveling to Britain in 1771 with a letter of introduction to David Garrick—an actor and manager of the Drury Lane Theatre—from Jean Monnet, their mutual acquaintance (Baugh 251-252). Garrick’s connections afforded De Loutherbourg access to the stage, where he combined landscape art with theatrical technology in his set designs. His influence on the theatrical scene of Drury Lane lasted for a decade; during which he controlled all things to do with the scenery from the lighting and rigging, as well as supplied drawings for the costumes of the dancers and actors. De Loutherbourg’s “designs integrated [actors] into the setting, heightening the illusion of reality and transforming the relationship between the actor and the audience” (Bermingham 380). Eventually, he began to design for other theaters, too, like the Covenant Garden theater that produced Omai. 
      Around the same time that De Loutherbourg began to expand his work from the Drury Lane Theater, he also began operating the Eidophusikon; a spectacle of De Loutherbourg’s invention that used miniature sets powered by mechanics and special lighting to illuminate the scenes. De Loutherbourg’s unique lighting technology was also used to immerse audiences at the theaters in the settings. His “use of transparencies was especially noted and enabled the stage to present with a new realism the moon shining, fire and the explosion of volcanoes” (Leach 540). The special effects and technology De Loutherbourg used boosted his popularity as he strove to create art through his stage sets.
      De Loutherbourg drew inspiration for his designs from his interests and experiences. Much like the rest of London in the late eighteenth century, De Loutherbourg was inspired by the stories and images circulating about explorations in the Southern Pacific. De Loutherbourg took an interest in Captain Cook’s voyages and the native Tahitian, Mai, who ventured back to England with Cook. Worrall notes that De Loutherbourg was inspired by the “careful drawings of the clothing of the peoples encountered on Cook’s voyages [that] almost certainly contributed enormously to Omai’s costuming” (169). De Loutherbourg’s stage designs in the late eighteenth century brought art, technology, and theatrical design together to the delight of audiences to recreate the ‘exotic’ visual experiences from across the world. 
Captain Cook Voyages
      Captain James Cook was made famous by his three explorations of the South Pacific that took place between 1768 to 1779. While on his second voyage, Cook brought Mai—a young Tahitian man—back to England in 1774. During his travels, Cook and his crew journaled, drew, and mapped the lands and peoples they encountered. These records were highly commoditized upon Cook’s crew’s returns to England, creating fame for Cook and his travel narratives. Quilley found that “Cook’s voyages assume iconic status as the foundation of British history in the Pacific and Cook himself emerges as the incorporation of reenacted national history within an imperial sphere” (850). Cook’s voyages and the images, documents, and people he returned with became popular conversation points and influenced the media being produced in the late eighteenth century. Worrall found that “The reception of ideas about the Pacific, and Captain Cook in particular, amongst the European and North American general populations, both literate and illiterate, was predominantly mediated through the agency of pantomime” (170). The drawings of Cook’s journeys and the people and records he returned with were a direct inspiration for several pantomimes, including De Loutherbourg and O’Keefe’s Omai. 
	John Webber accompanied Captain Cook on his voyages as one of the official artists on the Pacific expeditions. He painted the people and landscapes they encountered, and eventually, his work was turned into engravings that allowed for wide circulation among the English public. Quilley points out that Webber’s paintings feature some “of the same idyllic, luminous scene[s], with Cook and his artists forming the originating reference point for his understanding of the visual register of the coastal landscape” (853). Webber’s painted landscapes of the Pacific Islands influenced De Loutherbourg’s artistic choices in the visual design of Omai. 
Omai
      Mai, known in England as Omai, was the first Tahitian to travel all the way back to England with Captain Cook in 1774. After arriving in England, he was welcomed into London’s high society. James Mulholland said that while Mai was in England, “he toured London’s drawing rooms, was presented at court, dined with Samuel Johnson, and was painted by Joshua Reynolds. His presence—and Oceanic exploration generally—inspired frenzied publication, as authors and printers capitalized on a ‘craze’ for the Pacific” (343). Like the rest of the items brought by Cook back from his expeditions, Mai and his connections and fame served as muse for the English, from pantomimes to portraits. While Mai was not the Tahitian royalty as O’Keefe suggested, his prestigious reputation in England afforded him the lifestyle of one before he returned to Tahiti with Captain Cook in 1776. 
      Mai and all he represented remained a popular topic in England. His story gets ‘exotified’ and mixed with elements of foreign cultures from across the globe in English retellings and fictionalizations of his life, like Omai. In a recount of Mai’s time in England, Blake Clark points out that Mai’s story “represented an idea which had agitated intelligent Englishmen and been familiar to all for many years . . . the concept of the ‘Noble Savage’ the belief that man in a state of nature was superior to man ‘civilized’” (29). The Enlightenment concept of a Nobel Savage was popularized by Jean Jacques Rousseau, and the story of Mai from the romanticized Southern Pacific Islands of Cook’s voyages fit the stereotype. Mai’s time in England had lasting impacts on the late eighteenth-century pop culture media.


Work Cited
Baugh, Christopher. “Philippe de Loutherbourg: Technology-Driven Entertainment and Spectacle in the Late Eighteenth Century.” Huntington Library Quarterly, vol. 70, no. 2, 2007, pp. 251–68, https://doi.org/10.1525/hlq.2007.70.2.251. Accessed 9 May 2022. 
Bermingham, Ann. “Technologies of Illusion: De Loutherbourg’s Eidophusikon in Eighteenth-Century London.” Art History, vol. 39, no. 2, Mar. 2016, pp. 376–99, https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8365.12243.
Clark, Blake. Omai, First Polynesian Ambassador to England; the True Story of His Voyage There in 1774 with Captain Cook; of How He Was Feted by Fanny Burney, Approved by Samuel Johnson, Entertained by Mrs. Thrale & Lord Sandwich, and Painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds. University of Hawaii Press, 1969. 
Goff, Moira. “‘Actions, Manners, and Passions’: Entr’acte Dancing on the London Stage, 1700-1737.” Early Music, vol. 26, no. 2, 1998, pp. 213–28, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3128622. Accessed 17 May 2022.
Leach, R. (2018). An Illustrated History of British Theatre and Performance: Volume One – From the Romans to the Enlightenment (1st ed.). Routledge.  https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429463686. 
Mulholland, James. “Impersonating Islanders: Inauthenticity, Sexuality, and the Making of the Tahitian Speaker in 1770s British Poetry.” The Eighteenth Century (Lubbock), vol. 57, no. 3, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016, pp. 343–63, https://doi.org/10.1353/ecy.2016.0022. 
O'Brien, John. Harlequin Britain: Pantomime and Entertainment, 1690-1760. The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004. 
“Omai | Loutherbourg, Philip James de | V&A Explore the Collections.” Victoria and Albert Museum: Explore the Collections, 2021, collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O1113411/omai-set-model-loutherbourg-philip-james.
“Omai | Set Model | Loutherbourg, Philip James de | V&a Explore the Collections.” Victoria and Albert Museum: Explore the Collections, 2021, collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O1113412/set-model-loutherbourg-philip-james/.
“Omai | Loutherbourg, Philip James de | V&A Explore the Collections.” Victoria and Albert Museum: Explore the Collections, 2021, collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O735198/omai-set-model-loutherbourg-philip-james/. 
O'Quinn, Daniel, et al., editors. “Imperial Pantomime: John O'Keefe and Phililpe Jacques De Loutherbourg's Omai, or A Trip around the World.” The Routledge Anthology of Restoration and Eighteenth-Century Performance, Routledge, 2019, pp. 590–660.
Quilley, Geoff. “Reenacting Cook’s Voyages in Nineteenth-Century Visual Culture.” Studies in English Literature, 1500-1900, vol. 56, no. 4, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016, pp. 845–69, https://doi.org/10.1353/sel.2016.0040.
Worrall, David. “Pacific Pantomimes: Omai, or, A Trip round the World and The Death Of Captain Cook.” Harlequin Empire, Routledge, 2007, pp. 145–76, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315653242

Amber Walters-Molina 2


